(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: Don't tell us what we're going to feel...

PRESIDENT VOLODYMYR ZELENSKYY: I'm not telling you. I'm answering all these questions.

TRUMP: ...Because you're in no position to dictate that.

VICE PRESIDENT JD VANCE: That's exactly what you're doing.

AYESHA RASCOE, HOST:

A heated exchange in the Oval Office in front of reporters, and a minerals deal left unsigned. I'm Ayesha Rascoe.

SCOTT SIMON, HOST:

And I'm Scott Simon. This is UP FIRST from NPR News.

(SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC)

RASCOE: The meeting with Ukraine's president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, began smoothly, with President Donald Trump touting his role as a peacemaker between Ukraine and Russia.

SIMON: But it ended in shouting. We'll have the details and the reaction from Kyiv.

RASCOE: Demotions at the Department of Justice, including lawyers who worked on the January 6 cases.

SIMON: Also, the Department of Agriculture's plan to fight bird flu and high egg prices.

RASCOE: Stay with us. We have the news you need to start your weekend.

(SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC)

SIMON: There is shock and dismay in Ukraine after President Zelenskyy was braided in the Oval Office by both Vice President JD Vance and President Trump.

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

TRUMP: You're gambling with World War III. And what you're doing is very disrespectful to the country - this country...

ZELENSKYY: I'm with all respect to your country.

TRUMP: ...That's backed you far more than a lot of people said where they should have.

RASCOE: After the meeting, the White House canceled a joint news conference, and the Ukrainian delegation canceled plans to sign a treaty with the United States on sharing Ukraine's mineral resources.

SIMON: Trump had said this deal was key to organizing a ceasefire with Russia. NPR's Joanna Kakissis joins us now from Kyiv. Thanks for being with us.

JOANNA KAKISSIS, BYLINE: Thanks for having me, Scott.

SIMON: How would you describe the reaction you're experiencing there?

KAKISSIS: Well, Scott, I would describe this - the reaction as outrage laced with panic. The U.S. is Ukraine's most important single ally. And Zelenskyy himself has said repeatedly that it will be very hard for Ukraine to keep defending itself against Russia without U.S. support. I got several text messages from Ukrainians I know saying, oh, no, it's over. And they wondered - with the Trump administration embracing Russia, what will happen to Ukraine?

And now, this is the panic talking. But what's been louder than the panic has been the anger. Ukrainians are rallying around Zelenskyy, recording TikTok videos supporting him and writing on social media, likening President Trump and Vice President Vance to schoolyard bullies who set out to humiliate and browbeat Zelenskyy. One prominent Ukrainian politician, Mustafa Nayyem, posted a "Godfather" meme and wrote, quote, this administration doesn't just dislike us. They despise us. Not just Zelenskyy, but us - as a country, as a problem, as an annoying obstacle in their cozy world of backroom deals.

SIMON: Have you heard from Ukrainians specifically about the vice president's claim that President Zelenskyy hasn't shown gratitude to the U.S.?

KAKISSIS: We spoke to Ukrainians about this last night at the Kyiv food market. They brought it up, and - this idea that Vance thinks Zelenskyy isn't grateful. And they pointed out that Zelenskyy has literally thanked the U.S. almost every single time he speaks publicly. They found it baffling that Vance would claim this, since it's easy to check. A Ukrainian soldier, Denys Sokolov - he told us that Ukraine and the Trump administration have two different goals.

DENYS SOKOLOV: I think the main difference is that Ukraine wants peace, but Trump want to make a deal. That's a huge difference in our politics, in our vision to how we want to end the war.

KAKISSIS: So, Scott, making peace versus making a deal.

SIMON: Joanna, based on your conversations, what do Ukrainians seem to hope what will happen next?

KAKISSIS: Well, I hear many Ukrainians saying, look, let's work more closely with Europe. Our ties are already strong. Zelenskyy is now in London and is preparing to join a European conference on Sunday. European Union leaders have publicly defended Zelenskyy, including the EU's top diplomat, Kaja Kallas. She wrote on social media that the free world needs a new leader now, and it's up to us - the Europeans - to take this challenge. Here in Ukraine, political analysts say Zelenskyy's in a terrible spot, since Trump seems to dislike Zelenskyy and seems to openly favor Russian President Vladimir Putin. Here's Oleksandr Kraiev, the North America director for the Ukrainian Prism Foreign Policy Council in Kyiv.

OLEKSANDR KRAIEV: Putin does what Trump wants. He praises him. He compliments him. He speaks about reestablishing economic ties. And Zelenskyy speaks about justice. Zelenskyy speak about weapons. Zelenskyy speaks about defending Ukraine. So everything that Trump doesn't want to hear and doesn't want to do.

KAKISSIS: But Kraiev did say he expects Zelenskyy to keep trying to get through to President Trump.

SIMON: NPR's Joanna Kakissis in Kyiv, thanks so much.

KAKISSIS: You're welcome.

